[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger in this
very important video we're going to summarize the
case against this definition of a real number the
idea that a real number is an equivalence class of
koshy sequences of rationals introduced by George
caner this idea is probably the most comfortable
with most pure mathematicians it's the one that
they think about intuitively and immediately when
somebody asks them what is a real number we're
going to look more carefully at the various terms
involved and we're going to summarize the case for
the prosecution against it okay so I claim that
this definition doesn't really work the notion
of real number is logically seriously flawed and
ultimately I'm going to to try to convince you
that there's a more beautiful better mathematics
out there once we get past this Obstacle of
believing in these things which don't really
exist okay there's a lot of repetition
memorization and blind adherence here
involved and it's going to be challenging for
many of you because you've been indoctrinated
to believe that real numbers exist and it's
going to be um a hurdle for you to to let
go of this idea so try to be objective let's
have a look at the the difficulties uh fair
and squarely we're going to have to venture
a little bit into the Never Never Land of
infinite sets when we talk about you know what
equivalence classes are and their relation to
this definition as well okay we ready to go let's
proceed the first problem that we're going to look
at is the ambiguity with the meaning of the term
infinite sequence of rationals so it's important
to understand that it's not self-evident what
an infinite sequence is this is a term that
has to be defined and defined very clearly
in mathematics and it's unfortunately very
difficult to do this and so most of the time
people just pretend that there is an adequate
definition out there and they not responsible
for laying it out but here is already a source
of a lot of the errors in that we're not clear
enough about what the words mean so remember
that in mathematics the key wordss all have to
have precise definitions on which we can all
agree okay so what are some of the issues
well certain very important issue is this
difference between choice and algorithm that we
have emphasized quite a few times so if you're
given an infinite sequence say s whose terms
are S1 S2 S3 and let's suppose that they're
all rational numbers so at least the actual
individual elements are okay then there's at
least two possible ways of interpreting what we
mean when we say oh let's consider this sequence
one thing that we possibly could mean is that
we're thinking about this sequence as being given
by an infinite Choice operation in other words
we're thinking about the sequence as being just
a string of numbers that somebody or someone or
some machine has produced and laid out on a tape
for us with this tape going on infinitely in other
words there's no necessary Rhyme or Reason to the
entries there doesn't have to be a pattern there
doesn't have to be an algorithm or a procedure
or a law or a rule that generates the sequence in
our minds we can imagine a person say who happens
to be able to live forever just making up rational
numbers one at a time independently perhaps sort
of randomly whatever that means to Infinity this
tape just keeps on going and keeps on going and
keeps on going past any physical barrier that
you can possibly imagine so essentially beyond
the bounds of the universe just keeps on going
with more and more rational numbers that's one
way of thinking about what it means when I say
oh let's consider this sequence another quite
different way of thinking about what those
words mean is that we're talking about an
algorithm that we're presenting somebody with a
rule or an algorithm or a procedure or a law that
generates the terms of the sequence for example
maybe the formula SN = n^2 + 3 over n 4 + 4 this
is a particularly Pleasant kind of thing that
we've already identified as a suitable solid
kind of mathematical object so-called rational Pol
number on sequence but the modern mathematician
is happy to consider all kinds of other variants
or perhaps we could have a recursive formula for
example this one here S1 is 5 and maybe SN + 1
is sn^ 2 - 4 SN + 2 that would be another way of
generating a sequence or maybe we have some
kind of computer program kind of thing that
gives us a bunch of instructions written in some
programming language that will output the uh the
terms SN one at a time so there's all kinds of
possible variants to this but the basic idea is
that we have to have a finite way of writing down
the instructions for generating the sequence so in
this case it's the instructions themselves that
sort of capture the sequence the actual terms of
the sequence are in some sense sort of secondary
it's the instructions themselves which are the key
part of the sequence okay so very important to
understand that there's a huge gap huge a gulf
between these two ways of thinking about what
a sequence is and various questions and issues
will be dealt quite differently depending on
whether you take this position or this position
and it's perhaps worth pointing out that these
are not the only two positions that one could
adopt okay these are s of the most logical two
the ones that are usually found but it might
very well be that someone has some combination
of positions that they're going to think when
they say infinite sequence they're imagining that
there might be some algorithm say that generates
all the odd terms of the sequence and all the
even ones are given by some infinite Choice
okay maybe it's possible to imagine that kind
of thing so the point is that unless we clarify
what the word sequence or especially infinite
sequence means then it's not clear whether
we're talking about this kind of object or this
kind of object or something in between or maybe
something even a little bit different okay so
let's have a look at the various problems that
come about with these idea of sequence depending
on which of these two options we are imagining
our definition encompasses so problems with the
choice approach to infinite sequences first okay
so if your position is that an infinite sequence
means a bunch of rational numbers which have been
just chosen randomly and independently with
no necessary Rhyme or Reason to them then you
have to deal with the following problems first of
all very key point there are no examples you're
talking about a mathematical object for which you
can give no concrete example because all the koshy
sequences of rationals that actually come up
in practice in mathematics Koshi sequences for
pi or e or < tk2 or log 13 or S of five or some
integral or some infinite sum or anything else
that you're probably likely to be able to cook
up all of these are given essentially by formulas
or algorithms there are no known examples of
choice approaches to infinite sequences that are
complete a true example would require an infinite
amount of time memory and information to write
down to exhibit it would require an infinite
amount of resources the universe is too small
to contain such an object there's just not
enough room to string an infinite number of
rational numbers in a row somewhere so the best
that we can do is to imagine an infinite tape
and then to say a few initial ones and then
put three dots at some point and then pretend
that this is sort of adequately representing
this thing that we're imagining okay it's a
far cry from exhibiting one or three or 300 and
then some dots to actually specifying the whole
thing secondly related to this any operations
with such sequences must involve an infinite
amount of time and memory in other words they're
completely impossible if we're imagining to se
sequences given by choice and we're then
telling someone well now let's add these
sequences and we say something like to add
these sequences we just add them component
wise so we add the two first ones and then
we add the two second ones and then we add
the two third ones and so on easy enough to say
that but what we're really asking the person to
do is to do an infinite number of steps you
cannot actually make the calculation until
you've done an infinite number of steps
it's completely fictitious absurd kind of
scenario it's impossible it's completely
impossible so this approach is very much
in some kind of fantasy fairy tale world land
divorced from any real connection with the real
world in which we're living why do we do it
because it fulfills certain Wishful dreamings
that we have that's the reason it's not because
it makes sense okay but on the other hand if we
have a very algorithmic point of view to what
a sequence is there are still serious problems
serious logical problems for example the
whole discussion requires a prior definition
and theory of algorithms we have to have already
ventured into computer science land and learned
a lot about programming about algorithms about
machines and so on and brought those back into
mathematics and made them mathematically precise
before we can talk about sequences as given by
algorithms secondly it requires choices
reprogramming languages machines types of programs
and so on there are all kinds of choices that we
make when we're talking about computational issues
in terms of machine and languages and compilers
and so on and we have to discuss the relative
merits of these different approaches and whether
ultimately they give us equivalent theories or not
again it's a very subtle and delicate issue that
unless we know a lot of computer science we're
likely to be uncomfortable with and the reality is
that most mathematicians if they're going to go in
this direction probably don't have the requisite
underlying computer science background in order to
be able to honestly lay things out to make things
work then there's a very difficult obstacle okay
the equality of algorithms okay so if you're going
to believe in sequences as being generated by
algorithms well deciding whether two algorithms
gives you the same output or not is essentially
an intractable problem in general okay it's sort
of well known that this is almost impossible well
probably it is impossible so you're not in
a position to be able to say that we can for
sure determine whether given algorithm one and
give an algorithm to they're actually going to
generate the same sequence so related to that
there's no canonical forms there's no best or
simplest form for an algorithm that allows us to
quickly compare a different algorithms and then
there are issues going back to church anding
founder of computational um mathematics and
these issues are again having to do with whether
different kinds of computability are actually the
same is there just one notion of computability
when we say it's sort of a computable sequence
we have this idea that yes it's generated by
a machine but is there really just one notion
maybe there's several different types of Notions
of what a computable sequence really is depending
on the types of algorithms that we might allow so
there's um serious technical issues here that uh
again one has to deal with before we are confident
that an algorithmic approach to infinite sequences
works but even if you've mastered these ones here
this number three is a central problem that is not
going to go away and renders the this approach a
very very problematic logically the second major
problem is that the Koshi requirement itself is
inherently ambiguous the ambiguity takes different
forms depending on what approach to sequences we
have if we have a choice kind of approach then
verifying a sequence is Koshi requires an infinite
amount of work this is the kind of situation that
we talked about with a colat conjecture kind of
example okay but for a general Choice sequence
which is given not just by a complicated computer
program but perhaps just by some essentially
random choice of rational numbers verifying that
for all Epsilon greater than zero there is an n a
rational number such that little n and M bigger
than capital N implies that the difference SN
minus SM is less than Epsilon absolute value that
requires in general an infinite amount of work
because you have to check the existence of this
n for an infinite amount of epsilons and for your
General run-of-the-mill typical Choice sequence
there's not going to be any way of avoiding that
infinite amount of work so although you can phrase
the definition say oh it's uh you know the limit
exists if this and this happens in fact you're
actually requiring an infinite amount of work to
check whether this condition is actually satisfied
or not and that's in my view not a proper
definition on the other hand and if you have an
algorithmic approach to sequences the problem
manifests itself in quite a different way in
that case the definition is unclear about whether
knowledge that a given sequence is Koshi comes
with an algorithm to determine n from Epsilon
let me explain what I mean here so suppose that
we're working in the algorithmic world that all
the sequences that we're thinking about come from
some kind of algorithm okay so I you an algorithm
here's an algorithm and it generates some sequence
and then I say okay this is a Koshi sequence it
has this property now what does that mean when
I say that there for all Epsilon there exists
this end what does it mean one interpretation
is that there's an algorithm there's a separate
algorthm different from the one that I've shown
you that generates the sequence there's another Al
algorithm that generates the NS from the epsilons
so this second algorithm I input an Epsilon in it
let it run and it will pop out the N that's
required for this definition to work for that
given Epsilon that would be one interpretation of
what it means when we say for all Epsilon there
is we're asserting the existence of something if
you're working in an algorithmic world you could
interpret that to mean there's an algorithm to
do it on the other hand it might mean if you're a
choice mathematician you probably think that it it
should mean oh no there is some relationship here
but it may require an infinite amount of work to
establish the relationship between these epsilons
and NS so even the meaning of this statement is
not really very clear okay so it's not the case
that such a thing necessarily exists so even for a
this cats extended harmonic sequence which we saw
was a very pleasant algorithmically generated
sequence we saw that in fact there wasn't an
algorithm at least we didn't we don't know of
one and we don't know of the existence of one
that gives us the ends for the epsilons okay so
just because we have an algorithmically generated
sequence does not mean that we necessarily have
an algorithmic way of computing NS from Epsilon
so there's a element of infinity that will creep
in even if you're a Bonafide computer kind of
person and you just want to restrict to finite
things nevertheless this condition of this koshy
requirement is intrinsically infinite you're
going to have a hard time escaping that let
me rephrase that difficulty perhaps in a slightly
different way so here's another way of saying it
that deciding whether a given algorithmically
just generated infinite sequence say this one
here perhaps given by some algorithm that might
look like this given n for K from one to n do and
then do a number of things and then eventually
output SN that's a little program that generates
say that sequence it's very specific program
we're imagining it very concrete finite we can
run that thing fine but to decide whether this
sequence that we've generated this way is or is
not Koshi is almost surely impossible so for such
a sequence suppose we ask okay does this sequence
say have a limit or is this a Koshi sequence
or not these are questions that we cannot in
general do right so if we could do these kinds
of things then we could solve a lot of famous
problems so this Criterion of you know a sequence
is Koshi or not it really is asking us to check an
infinite number of things that's that's why it's
impossible for us to do it in general okay it's
not a finite kind of question like you know is
this number bigger than this number or is this
number times this number equal to this number
it's not like that it has a an infinite aspect
built into it making it sort of logically very
uh problematic the next problem has to do with
the other sort of major term which is involved in
the definition the idea of an equivalence class
so the meaning of equivalence class is also
ambiguous okay so to understand this really
we would have to venture into the dream world
of Canter's infinite set theory which claims
amongst other things that there are things such
as infinite sets classes paradoxes no sorry not
paradoxes there are no paradoxes uh equivalence
relations equivalence classes hierarchies of
Infinities hierarchies of angels no sorry not
Hier of angels uh inaccessible Cardinals yes
there's inaccessible Cardinals there's lots
of choice freedom of thought there are axioms
there's Zello and frinkle that we pay homage
to truth beauty and many other beautiful lovely
incredibly interesting things sure as long as you
sort of you know are happy to stay in a reclining
position and not sort of wake up and uh you know
actually look around and see what's actually the
case okay this is a big elaborate dream world not
supported by proper definitions or clear arguments
I'm going to eventually Venture into this infinite
World this infinite dream world of caner and we
going talk about infinite sets you already know
that I don't believe in them neither should you
okay but there are a lot of auxiliary Concepts
which don't work properly when you go from finite
sets which are perfectly fine and interesting in
fact very interesting to infinite sets as they are
current laid out so the equivalence classes store
is part of this of this make believe world uh and
one should be highly suspicious of it for that
reason all right so without going into the whole
details of the difficulties with infinite set
theory let's at least summarize the aspects of
it that are sort of relevant for this discussion
okay so the first uh important idea is the idea of
an equivalence relation I can at least show
you what it's like here in this in the case
of these infinite sequences of rationals we're
talking about so if we have two Koshi sequences
of rationals okay when I say you know we have
two koshy sequences of rationals it's all in
quotes right because this is all a little bit of
a fantasy as far as I'm concerned but let's play
along so we're imagining sequence s and sequence
S Prime and again our imaginings are going to be
dependent on whether we have a choice point of
view or an algorithmic point of view so what
we're actually imagining is potentially quite
different from what our friend is imagining
so we're imagining something okay here is the
definition that we say that s is equivalent to
S Prime these two sequences are equivalent we're
making this definition precisely when the limit
as n approaches Infinity of the difference SN
minus SN Prime equals 0 we take the differences
between these two these two these two and look
at those differences if those differences which
are rational numbers go to zero if their limit is
zero then we say that the sequences are equivalent
so this is called an equivalence relation in set
theory and that means that it has certain basic
properties three basic properties first of all
it's sort of um item potent so any sequence is
equivalent to itself yes that's kind of clear and
the second that is that it's symmetric so if s is
equivalent to S Prime then S Prime is equivalent
to S that's also pretty uh pretty clear and the
third which is usually the trickiest one to
verify is the so-called transitive property
which says that if you have three sequences
say s s Prime and S Prime if you know that
s is equivalent to S Prime and you know that S
Prime is equivalent to sble Prime then it is the
case that s is equivalent to S Prime so if this
property holds we say it's transitive if all three
properties hold then this is called an equivalence
relation okay so in in our situation this is an
equivalence relation but a natural question
is how do you tell if two Koshi sequences are
equivalent again the answer depends very much
on whether you have a choice point of view or
whether you have an algorithmic point of
view if you have a choice point of view
you just imagine having a new sequence which
is the differences and now you have this new
sequence of rational numbers and just a question
of deciding whether its limit is zero or not and
for that all what you need to do is just OB erve
the whole sequence to Infinity that's all a few
billion years later still no problem we're
just still we're just checking to see that
the limits zero so past the end of time yes
finally we finally whatever that means we
we're able to see the whole sequence whatever
that means and to verify that yes the limit is
zero okay that's a in my view sort of completely
silly kind of a notion but okay so then there's
that more sensible algorithmic approach okay
you have two algorithms one for this one and
one for this one what does it mean for the two
sequences to be equivalent well it means that
you generate this difference sequence and then you
have to tell whether its limit is zero or not but
we've seen that this is essentially impossible
because now you're no longer allowed to do this
infinite amount of work that the choice people
are imagining themselves able to do right somebody
believes in choices oh just go and do an infinite
amount of work no problem we believe in that
okay but if you're a computer scientist you don't
believe in being able to do an infinite amount of
work you can't just wave your hand and say oh now
we do an infinite amount of work no you have to
have a program that will do something for you and
in general you cannot do this this is impossible
as we've seen with this colat sequence that we
talked about right deciding whether the colat
sequence is equivalent to the sequence 0 0 these
are two sequences which are completely given by
algorithms this one a very simple algorithm this
one not too hard deciding whether equivalent is
essentially equivalent to solving this famous
collapse conjecture so you can see that this
condition saying oh this is equivalent to this if
this condition is satisfied you very well can say
that but even in practice it's either ridiculous
or impossible of course you don't see this in the
analysis courses because they don't present these
kinds of typical examples they consider only very
specialized examples that have been cherry-picked
baby examples where everything works out and you
have a nice little difference and you end up with
the sequence you know 1 over n s and oh yes 1 over
n^ s goes to goes to zero so yes everything is
hunky dory all right so carrying on with problem
three the essential problems having to do with
his idea of equivalence uh classes the natural
question now is what is an equivalence class I've
mentioned to you what an equivalence relation is
or at least told you about the the equivalence
relation that we're interested in between two
sequences being essentially equivalent what's
an equivalence class well the idea is that if
you have some set and you have some relation and
it's an equivalence relation satisfying the three
properties that I told you about then you're
allowed to according to standard set theory
form equivalence classes and what you do is you
group all the things which are equivalent to each
other into one big group okay so if you put s
in here and if S Prime happens to be equivalent
to S you have to put S Prime in the same group
and if s double Prime is also equivalent to S
and so therefore to S Prime you put it in as
well and if you have another sequence say t
which is not equivalent to s so therefore will be
not equivalent to S Prime and not equivalent to s
double Prime then you don't put it in here so in
here go all the things which are equivalent to S
and this whole thing is called an equivalence
class why don't we call it an equivalence set
well that's a very uh instructive question Okay
the reason is because in in other applications
of this sort of theory we want to group things
together like this but because of the various
paradoxes in set the that are sort of floating
around the boundaries of the subject people
realize that a lot of these big conglomerations
that they' like to form and conglomerations in
other words we might say grouping or collection
or Menagerie there all kinds of words we could
use but they realize that these things are too big
in the sense that they're likely to be paradoxical
if we view them as sets so they adopt this sort
of game where you call them a class instead of a
set hoping thereby to avoid any potential problems
with the sets which are too big all right that's
the reason for this terminology and that's what
it means in this case so the upshot is that for
the standard definition a real number Alpha is
the equivalence class of a Koshi sequence of
rationals for example here's what a typical real
number looks like it's a big class which I'll
still denote with brackets and here is one koshy
sequence of rationals and here's another one and
this one is supposed to be equivalent to this one
and here's a third one which is also equivalent to
these two but of course there's more than just
these uh three because we can modify a given
sequence in lots of ways and still get equivalent
sequences in in particular you can modify any one
or initial segment of such a sequence and it stays
equivalent in other words if I take this sequence
here and I say I replace that 1/3 by 349 over 73
then that will be a new sequence which is still
equivalent to the former one so it's also going to
be somewhere in this list so you can imagine the
complexity here that any sequence in this sensible
list has the property that if you pick randomly
any finite number of entries and change them any
way you like to any other rational numbers that
new sequence that you get will also be in the list
somewhere that's not the only way you can generate
new elements in this equivalence class for example
what you can do is you can take this sequence here
and then you can add to all the terms some new
sequence whose elements go to zero for example
I can add the sequence 1/ n to this one or maybe
1 over n^ 2 or maybe some much more complicated
sequence as long as it goes to a zero then by
adding it term by term to this sequence here
I'm going to be assured of getting a equivalent
sequence which means it's also going to be in here
so the long and short of it is that this uh these
little three dots you see here representing all
the other sequences which are in this equivalence
class this three little dots is a very modest
little uh Place keeper because it actually um
stands for not just quad zillions not just an
infinite number but a so-called uncountably
infinite number of other additional sequences
which are in this equivalence class and so that's
what a real number is there ladies and gentlemen
is a real number according to the definition of
caner and it's not a very good complete picture
because none of these uh things are prescribed
this is very much a choice point of view and this
is also uh highly dubious doesn't it look like
a beautiful natural thing to be doing arithmetic
with right on this the foundation of calculus and
Analysis is built according to the modern pure
mathematician it's a very sad story it is a very
sad story I'm afraid and unfortunately it impacts
on young people especially because you are being
taught this stuff which doesn't work it's almost
patently ridiculous and it leads you to this fairy
tale Rosy viewed uh view of mathematics which is
actually quite divorced from the the true beauty
of mathematics which is really out there which
you could actually touch sh and see and write down
and admire very unfortunate so I gave you a choice
view of a real number I probably should give you
an algorithmic view as well so what does a real
number look like if you take the same definition
but you adopt an algorithmic approach to sequences
well it looks like this you still have some
brackets there's an infinite number of stuff
in here and each of these things is a a program or
an algorithm or a formula or procedure for example
here this might be something program like this
give an N set this equal to this do all these
various things output SN here's another one which
is a more like a function SN equals this if n is
congruent to 3 mod 8 it's equal to this if n is
congruent to 5 Mod 8 etc etc or it might be a set
of instructions that doesn't look at all like a
computer program Maybe it's a set of instructions
that says go to Wolfram Alpha input n find prime
factors maybe somewhere you have to go and consult
your neighbor and ask your neighbor for some input
who knows okay depends on what you allow for kind
of algorithm so anyway we imagine all these
different algorithms and supposedly they're
all equivalent to each other but equivalence at
the level of algorithms is almost impossible to
check so this is just as much a fantasy kind of
object as the other one is or almost uh almost as
much it's it's more sensible but it's still pretty
far out there it's still far removed from actual
reality to further cement this position
I want to present to you a theorem which
uh you may have already seen in my um famous
math problems 19 lecture right which talks a
lot about some related issues we're also talking
about this problem of describing the Continuum
in these various unfortunate attempts that we
currently have to setting up the real numbers
so my theorem is and I think it should be a
really famous theorem I'm hoping you spread
the word that all real numbers are the same okay
and it's uh the proof is by inspection so here's
one uh real number it's called Alpha and here
are the various strips endless tapes on which
these uh sequences are written so we're having a
a choice point of view here so here's one sequence
in the equivalence class there's another in this
equivalence class there's another in equivalence
class you might think oh this looks like it's Pi
look there's three 3.1 3.14 this is the kind of
sequence I see in my analysis texts they look a
lot more like this than than like these yes they
do because they're trying to convince you about
something that's uh much more complicated than
they would like you to think okay that's one one
equivalence class determining a real number Alpha
and here's another equivalence class determining
a completely different number a beta who knows
maybe it's run2 because it starts 1 1.4 1.41 and
so but there's nothing in these three dots to
let you conclude that the sequence carries on
like this it might do wildly different things
okay these don't look very much the same do they
but that's because in these three dots which are
in uh the rest of these uh equivalence classes
there are more sequences and the reality is that
a sequence that starts like this is also found in
this equivalence class and a sequence which starts
like this is also found in this equivalence class
and the reason is because as I've said before you
can take any finite initial portion of a Koshi
sequence change it arbitrarily as you will and
you're going to get an an equivalent sequence
so all these equivalence classes representing
all different real numbers they all look exactly
the same if you just look at the first trillion
entries of each of the sequences inside if you
just restrict yourself to only looking at the
first trillion entries of all the sequences then
all of the real numbers look exactly the same and
what if you replace trillion with trillion
to the trillion to the trillion if you look
at all the first trillion to the trillion to
the trillion elements of these sequences they
all look exactly the same and since we're only
capable of looking at a finite amount of stuff
clearly just by inspection we can see that these
two real numbers are the same in fact any two real
numbers are the same QED I think this is going
to be a remarkable simplification for many math
students right be great now that we have all real
numbers are essentially the same how how much uh
how much simpler can mathematics really be the
fourth problem I want to talk about is this one
connecting with applications and infinite decimals
how do you convert an equivalence class of Koshi
sequences to an infinite decimal whether you're
thinking about a real number as an equivalence
class of choice sequences or you're thinking of
it as an equivalence class of algorithmically
generated sequences how do you go about taking
your equivalence class and converting it into
a decimal number or equivalently how do you take
an infinite decimal and convert it to one of your
things this is kind of necessary to connect with
what the applied mathematicians and the physicists
Engineers Etc are doing out there this is how
we would like to actually computationally work
with real numbers so natural question is how do
you go from one to the other well let's say you
figure out a way of doing this so now my question
is well then what happens to the difficulties with
arithmetic with infinite decimals remember when
we were talking about infinite decimals and the
problems with them we had very concrete problems
having to do with being able to do arithmetic with
them so my question for you is what happens if we
convert these problems into your situation right
if I have two infinite decimal real numbers and I
don't know how to add them because of some problem
say with uh some repeating nines appearing when
I'm trying to add them and I have a problem of
carry and I don't know what to do can I just
convert both of them into your equivalence
classes of Koshi sequences make the computation
of arithmetic in that framework and then convert
back again can I do that can I then circumvent
the actual problems that I had problem five show
us the arithmetic convince us that you actually
can do arithmetic with these equivalent classes
of Koshi sequences of rationals so challenge one
Express the three most common irrational numbers
Pi e and run2 as equivalent classes of koshy
sequences of rationals let's have a look what
they actually look like these equivalence classes
of koshy sequences when we actually apply the idea
to the simplest irrational numbers okay the ones
that everyone uses for examples how does all this
philosophical Theory actually Implement itself
in concrete situation this is a litmus test for
separating talking with actual real mathematics
okay ask for examples ask to see an exact example
laid out properly clearly and completely if they
can do it you're likely to be convinced or at
least you're going to be moving that direction if
they can't and just want to stay at the level of
chatchat talk talk philosophize you know jargon
then you should be skeptical so if you manag to
be able to do this here's Challenge number two
I want you to compute using the above so using
the arithmetic of equivalence classes of koshy
sequences of rationals that you've developed
please tell us what the answers to these three
questions are I'm interested in what is Pi + e
plus root2 I want to make a computation telling
telling us what that is and I'm interested in what
is pi * e * < tk2 and a little more challenging
what is pi to the E / < tk2 so I want explicit
answers to these three to demonstrate that yes we
can actually do arithmetic with these real numbers
of course it's a bit of a rhetorical question
because we all know that you're not going to be
able to do it don't we is there anybody in even
a little bit of doubt about that we all know that
if you ask a pure mathematician to evaluate Pi +
e plus < tk2 they're going to think for a while
and then they're going to tell you oh it's just pi
plus e plus < tk2 they're going to repeat back the
question to you well that's how you do arithmetic
with real numbers then you should be very happy if
you're a student because then you can just solve
questions involving computation by just repeating
the question back as an answer the final issue
that I want to tell you about is problems with
relating rational numbers inside the real numbers
so the question is what happens to the rational
numbers we have a very beautiful arithmetic
with rational num numbers very rich structure
beautiful number Theory involved classically
very important a fundamental tool for people in
the Practical real world what's going to happen
if we start to think about the rational numbers
as being contained inside these new real numbers
well contrary to what you probably have learned
there are very serious consequences for this
in terms of contamination of the arithmetic
of Q with the arithmetic of R the vagueness and
the wafflin and basically the inability to make
concrete computations that I've hinted at in
my last problem in R end up affecting Q as well
because the rules of deciding when two things
are the same are no longer as stringent as they
are in Q let me try to illustrate that uh with
an example so here is 2/3 a very nice rational
number and we know that 2/3 is also the same as 46
it's also the same as -4 over - 6 and many other
ones but there's a very concrete way of telling
whether two rational numbers are the same when we
think of 2/3 as a real number suddenly the story
changes completely the nature of this rational
number is completely transformed into something
that's beautiful like a gem into something that's
like a pile of mush here is the pile of mush
here's the beautiful rational number here's
the pile of mush well actually just the part of
the pile of mush there's there's much more there
will be amongst the countably infinite strips of
paper that represent the equivalence class of 2/3
there will be inside there the distinguished
strip which is just 2/3 2/3 2/3 2/3 and so on
to Infinity but unfortunately there's nothing
to mark this thing as distinguished it's just
one of trillions quad zillions of various crazy
looking sequences most of them that look more like
this so in fact of course as we've just seen
from our theorem if you actually look at the
finite initial sequences of this one here it
looks just like any other one the point is
that once you uh try to start doing arithmetic
with rational numbers in the context of real
numbers then the anything kind of goes rules that
govern real numbers will necessarily also apply
to rational numbers for real numbers there
are no canonical forms for anything there is
never any way of deciding that one particular
algorithm is preferable to another or that one
particular expression is preferable to another
there's just this mass of essentially you know
sort of uniform descriptions of things so for
example we saw that this uh philosophy of doing
arithmetic by repeating the question back as
an answer which is basically the only way you
can actually really exhibit irrational number
arithmetic if you apply that to rational number
arithmetic you get a complete uh diminishing of
the natural arithmetic that students learn so
that 1/2 plus 1/3 while though it may equal
56 56 is just one of many possible ways of
thinking about things but this 1/2 plus 1/3 is
also a legitimate possible approach to what it
is I mean if Pi + e is allowed to be Pi + e
then why should not 1 12 + 1/3 be allowed to
be 1 12 + 1/3 and you can see this also more
clearly from the algorithmic point of view if
you have an algorithm to generate this sequence
well then you very well could have an algorithm
that basically computes uh computes this or
computes 56 directly they're all going to
be just examples of algorithms in this big
equivalence class and finally for example
suppose that you have some calculation like sum of
N = 0 to 10 of 1 n^2 well in ordinary arithmetic
you would be obliged to actually work this out
but if you're working over the real numbers you
can claim that well all what you really need to
do is calculate it like this so here's another
example of that if we uh have for example the
sum n = 0 to Infinity of say 1 / n Cub say * n
factorial if I ask someone who's doing real
number arithmetic what is the value of this
infinite sum well with real number arithmetic this
kind of thing is just represented by the formula
itself there's in general no more efficient
way of describing what the number is than just
to write it down again so the calculation
of such a sum just amounts to the not very
profound repeating of the question back
again so this is a serious contamination I
think of rational number arithmetic can you
imagine a situation where undergraduates uh
um if they're answering questions in a test
raise their hands and say Excuse me sir are
we working over the rational numbers or over
the real numbers on this test and they're hoping
that their instructor says oh we're working over
the real numbers great we're working over the
real numbers anything goes you have an infinite
sum that's what it is you have a finite sum
that's what it is you have a computation like
this just repeat the answer back real number
arithmetic is just so simple to do isn't it
okay so it's
a lot of reasons okay to be highly skeptical
of this standard story for real numbers real
numbers as equivalence classes of Kosh sequences
of rational numbers it doesn't work we are also
going to look at the last sort of serious Bastion
of real number arithmetic which is the idea of
dedic and cuts but before we do that I want want
to have a short diversion to actually looking at
opening up some classical calculus texts and
real analysis texts to see what they do in
terms of addressing this issue of how we set up
the real numbers okay it's got to be more than
just a discussion a debate with me on one side
and many other people on the other side saying
yes it is no it isn't yes it is no it isn't it's
sensible to all Al look at the literature look
at the evidence look what's actually written and
see does what these people do make sense can we
open up a book and find out what real numbers
are how do we do arithmetic with them how we
prove the laws of arithmetic so I'm going to uh
have a look at a selection of interesting texts
which will uh if nothing else introduce you to
some fine books but I hope it will also open your
eyes to the almost Universal weakness that this
real number Theory really comes with out there
in the educational world so I hope you'll join me
for that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening